Add u: options namespace (#846)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry/unicode.md

> # MessageFormat 2.0 Unicode Registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# MessageFormat 2.0 Unicode Reserved Namespace Registry
```

> The `u:` namespace is reserved for use by the Unicode Consortium.

Reviewer: Perhaps quote the design document here?

```suggestion
This registry is for items in the namespace `u:` 
which is reserved for use by the Unicode Consortium. 
This registry can contain _functions_ or _options_. 
Implementations are not required to implement entries found in this registry. 

Items in this registry are stable and subject to stability guarantees. 
This registry might sometimes be used to incubate functionality before promotion to the RGI or default registry in a future release. 
In such cases, the `u:` namespace version is retained, but deprecated.
```

Author: The first paragraph is mostly fine, but as #634 is only a PR at this time, it's way too early to refer to the RGI, for instance, or talk about incubation. We can add this language later, when we get consensus on these processes and their names.

I would also find it a bit odd to say e.g. that this "can contain _functions_", when AFAIK no such `u:` function has been proposed by anyone.

Reviewer: Permission to do something does not obligate us to actually do it. No one has proposed a `u:` function, but there's no reason to forbid them.

---

Are you disagreeing with the design in #634? More specifically, do you disagree with my thinking about how to organize the registries? I do think we should lock-step these efforts to some degree. We'll probably rename RGI somewhere along the way, for example. But I think we'll likely end up with the same concepts at least.

We could replace my line 9 above with something like:

> Items in this registry might be deprecated but will not be removed.

Author: I am in general agreement about having definitions for non-required functions and options, but I'm honestly not really sure what the current state of #634 is, and whether e.g. the registry development process added to the PR last Friday is final, or whether it's being iterated on. When we last discussed this on [a call in May](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/4514e880a8690ba2dd78a70696b4c89db93697ba/meetings/2024/notes-2024-05-06.md#pr-634), it was "Still in progress".

I'm also not sure whether the current design doc proposal's language "Implementations are not required to implement any values found in this registry and may adopt or ignore registry entries at their discretion." ought to be strengthened into something more like a SHOULD.

My preference would be to not lockstep processes that do not strictly need lockstep, and to focus first on the concrete (i.e. this PR), and use that experience to inform the registry maintenance plan. On which we ought to have a separate discussion, if/once it's in a stable state.

Reviewer 2: Why functions?

The idea for the parameters is "u: parameters are potentially recognized / honored by all functions"
What would be the meaning of a "u:" function?

If we think "u:function" is a Unicode function, it is redundant.
All functions in the standard registry are Unicode functions, since this is a Unicode spec.

## Options

> This section describes common options which each implementation SHOULD support
> for all _functions_ and _markup_.

Reviewer: Perhaps:

```suggestion
This section describes _options_ which are intended to be common to all _functions_.
Implementations SHOULD support resolving and passing these _options_.
_Function_ authors SHOULD implement each _option_ as described here to ensure interoperability.
```

Author: The proposed language doesn't quite match the [accepted design](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/expression-attributes.md#contextual-options), though. These are not intended to be options that are handled by each function, but by the implementation, and they e.g. apply changes to the function context, so that function authors explicitly do not need to do anything to enable their use.

### `u:id`

A string value that is included as an `id` or other suitable value
in the formatted parts for the _placeholder_,
or any other structured formatted results.

Ignored when formatting a message to a string.

> Accepts string values, or values which can be stringified without error.

Reviewer: Should this say it must have a value? Is the empty literal, for example, acceptable?

Author: An empty literal is an empty string, and is allowed by this language. This is intentional, as it's possible for a message containing a `u:id=$x` to sometimes need formatting without an identifier value, for which an empty string is a good stand-in.

For other values, a _Bad Option_ error is emitted
and the `u:id` option is ignored.

### `u:locale`

> A comma-delimited list of BCP 47 language tags,
> or an implementation-defined list of such tags.

Reviewer: Perhaps (because ULI's are a specific narrowing of the validity rules and we are, after all, the CLDR-TC):

```suggestion
A comma-delimited prioritized list of BCP47 language tags
which are expected to be Unicode Locale Identifiers,
or an implementation-defined list of locale identifiers.
```

Author: Unfortunately, ULI is not only a narrowing of the validity rules, it also explicitly allows for `_` as a separator, so e.g. `en_US` is a valid ULI but not a valid BCP47 tag. This is not universal, see e.g. tc39/ecma402#777 for an open discussion of supporting this in JS.

Reviewer 3: It needs stronger language than "which are expected to be".

```suggestion
A comma-delimited prioritized list of BCP47 language tags that are also [valid Unicode CLDR locale identifiers](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/#BCP_47_Conformance).
```

I think allowing "implementation-defined locale identifiers" is dangerous, and will lead to interoperability problems. What is the thinking behind allowing these? `locale:|The King's English|`

Replaces the _locale_ defined in the _function context_ for this _expression_.

> The value is ignored when set on _markup_.

Reviewer: Why? Why not leave it up to the implementer?

Reviewer: (Note: this comment is about line 28)

Author: Because that could introduce surprising differences in implementation behaviour and/or require us to define how markup open/close matching works. Consider this example, formatted as `en`:
```
French: {#span u:locale=fr}{$n :number}{/span}
English: {$n :number}
```

If we don't explicitly ignore `u:locale` and `u:dir` on markup, I would count it as likely that some implementations would format the first number in English, and others in French.

If that is desirable behaviour, then we would need to define open/close matching to ensure that the second number is still formatted in English.

Reviewer: Wouldn't the `u:locale` only affect the markup placeholder? Why would it affect the enclosed `$n` placeholder?

Author: It's something that at least @mihnita has expressed some interest in, and if we leave it up to implementations, that becomes a possible interpretation of what happens when spanning markup has `u:` options set on it.

Reviewer: In your example messages, the difference between the two is some markup. The formatting function should still format using the invoking (contextual) locale. For example, the invoking locale might be `fr-CA-u-nu-cans` and you wouldn't want the markup's `lang` attribute to remove the additional formatting (the example is contrived: I don't believe that the `Cans` script has its own digits). If you wanted to trim the locale, you should put it on the `:number` invocation. Otherwise markup can cause the formatting to change, which is spooky--and unlike anything else in MF2.

Author: This is now an error.

During processing, the `u:locale` option

> is always removed from the resolved mapping of _options_.

Reviewer: Why? Because it replaces the value in the function context? Since nothing can overwrite it (it's namespaced), why not pass it?

Values matching the following ABNF are always accepted:
```abnf
u-locale-option = langtag *([s] "," [s] langtag)
```

> using `langtag` as defined in [RFC 5646](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5646).

Reviewer: So let's not link to a specific RFC! BCP47 only has the one `langtag` production in it. Link to BCP47.

Author: ```suggestion
using `langtag` as defined in [BCP 47](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt).
Note that `langtag` is the rule for "normal language tags",
and does not include private-use or grandfathered tags.
```

Reviewer: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt should be https://www.rfc-editor.org/bcp/bcp47

> Implementations MAY support additional language tags,
> such as private-use or grandfathered tags,
> or tags using `_` instead of `-` as a separator.
> When the value of `u:locale` is set by a _variable_,
> implementations MAY support non-string values otherwise representing locales.

Reviewer: Some problems here. Private-use and grandfathered tags are already covered by both the `langtag` production and BCP47 in general.

I think you're trying to do several things here and we should split them apart:

```suggestion
Implementations MAY process the list of locale identifiers,
including interpretation of language tags or canonicalization of values 
(such as mapping grandfathered tags to modern representations).

Implementations MAY convert or map the list to a prioritized list of
implementation-specific values.
For example, a JavaScript implementation might convert it into an `Intl.Locale` 
while a Java implementation might convert the list into an array of `java.util.Locale` objects.
Implementations MAY reject unrecognized or unsupported values.

Implementation MAY support proprietary or implementation-specific
locale identifiers.
```

Author: I updated the previous paragraph to note that as we're specifically referring to the `langtag` rule and not the `Language-Tag` rule, we're not requiring support for private-use or grandfathered tags.

The intended point of this passage is to make sure that values not matching `u-locale-option` may still be accepted, and explicitly calling out the extensions that are required for either BDP47 or ULI support.

Reviewer: I don't think this is the right move. We don't need to get into the locale identifier game. I think referencing `langtag` instead of `Language-Tag` is a backwards step.

Do you not agree with the various changes I suggested?

Author: I agree that we should not get into the locale identifier game. So much as we did with `:datetime` literals, I think we should identify a minimal definition that must be supported, and allow for implementations to go beyond that. And I think the `langtag` rule offers that minimum, i.e. something that can be supported by both a BCP47 and a ULI implementation, where both of those have features unsupported by the other.

Author: Replaced `langtag with `unicode_bcp47_locale_id`.

For unsupported values, a _Bad Option_ error is emitted
and the value of the `u:locale` option is ignored.

### `u:dir`

Replaces the base directionality defined in
the _function context_ for this _expression_.

> The value is ignored when set on _markup_.

Reviewer: Why?

Author: See thread above on `u:locale`.

Reviewer: Shouldn't I be able to write:

```
I like {#html:strong u:dir=ltr}ASCII{/html:strong} as long as it's UTF-8.
```

And have it produce:

```html
I like <strong dir=ltr>ASCII</strong> as long as it's UTF-8.
```

Author: You should write instead:
```
I like {#html:strong dir=ltr}ASCII{/html:strong} as long as it's UTF-8.
```
as the direction you're seeking to control is the direction of the contents of the `<strong>` rather than the tag itself. This is rather similar to my example above in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/846#discussion_r1697345596:
```
{#span u:locale=fr}{$n :number}{/span}
```

If we allow `u:dir` and `u:locale` to be used as stand-ins for the HTML `dir` and `lang` attributes, we introduce unnecessary confusion about whether or not these options apply to the span between the open and close elements.

Author: Made using `u:dir` and `u:locale` on markup an error.
